---
title: "Durability and related matters"
layout: article
---

## About This Guide

This guide covers queue, exchange and message durability, as well as
other topics related to durability, for example, durability in
clustered environments.

This work is licensed under a <a rel="license"
href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/">Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 Unported License</a> (including images and
stylesheets). The source is available [on
Github](https://github.com/clojurewerkz/langohr.docs).


## What version of Langohr does this guide cover?

This guide covers Langohr 3.6.x and later versions.

## Entity durability and message persistence

### Exchange Durability

AMQP 0-9-1 separates the concept of entity durability (queues,
exchanges) from message persistence. Exchanges can be durable or
transient. Durable exchanges survive broker restart, transient
exchanges do not (they have to be redeclared when the broker comes
back online), however, not all scenarios and use cases mandate
exchanges to be durable.

To create a durable exchange, declare it with the `:durable` property
set to `true`:

``` clojure
(ns langohr.examples
  (:require [langohr.exchange :as lx]))

(lx/fanout ch "a.fanout" {:durable true})
```

### Queue Durability

Queues can be durable or transient. Durable queues survive broker
restart, transient queues do not (they have to be redeclared when the
broker comes back online), however, not all scenarios and use cases
mandate queues to be durable.

To create a durable exchange, declare it with the `:durable` property
set to `true`:

``` clojure
(ns langohr.examples
  (:require [langohr.queue :as lq]))

(lq/declare ch "a.queue" {:durable true})
```

Durability of a queue does not make _messages_ that are routed to that
queue durable. If a broker is taken down and then brought back up,
durable queues will be re-declared during broker startup, however,
only _persistent_ messages will be recovered.

### Binding Durability

Bindings of durable queues to durable exchanges are automatically
durable and are restored after a broker restart. The AMQP 0.9.1
specification states that the binding of durable queues to transient
exchanges must be allowed. In this case, since the exchange would not
survive a broker restart, neither would any bindings to such and
exchange.

### Message Persistence

Messages may be published as persistent and this, in conjunction with
queue durability, is what makes an RabbitMQ persist them to disk. If
the server is restarted, the system ensures that received persistent
messages in durable queues are not lost. Simply publishing a message
to a durable exchange or the fact that a queue to which a message is
routed is durable does not make that message persistent. Message
persistence depends on the persistence mode of the message itself.

**Note** that publishing persistent messages affects performance (just
like with data stores, durability comes at a certain cost to
performance).

Set the `:persistent` option to `true` when using
`langohr.basic/publish` method to publish your message as persistent:

``` clojure
(ns langohr.examples
  (:require [langohr.queue :as lq]))

(lb/publish ch "events" "log.info" {:persistent true})
```

### Clustering and High Availability

To achieve the degree of durability that critical applications need,
it is necessary but not enough to use durable queues, exchanges and
persistent messages. You need to use a cluster of brokers because
otherwise, a single hardware problem may bring a broker down
completely.

RabbitMQ offers a number of high availability features for both
scenarios with more (LAN) and less (WAN) reliable network connections.

See the [RabbitMQ clustering](http://www.rabbitmq.com/clustering.html)
and [high availability](http://www.rabbitmq.com/ha.html) guides for
in-depth discussion of this topic.


### Highly Available (Mirrored) Queues

Whilst the use of clustering provides for greater durability of
critical systems, in order to achieve the highest level of resilience
for queues and messages, high availability configuration should be
used. This is because although exchanges and bindings survive the loss
of individual nodes by using clustering, messages do
not. Without mirroring, queue contents reside on exactly one node, thus the
loss of a node will cause message loss.

See the [RabbitMQ high availability guide](http://www.rabbitmq.com/ha.html)
for more information about mirrored queues.


## What to Read Next

The documentation is organized as [a number of guides](/articles/guides.html), covering various topics.

We recommend that you read the following guides first, if possible, in this order:

 * [Error Handling and Recovery](/articles/error_handling.html)
 * [Using TLS (SSL) Connections](/articles/tls.html)
 * [RabbitMQ Extensions to AMQP 0.9.1](/articles/extensions.html)
